Steps and Commands for Server Login, User Management, SSH Keys, File/Folder Operations, and Permissions.

To login in to a server -----  	ssh username@server_ip
To add a new user	------- sudo adduser username e.g adduser Tope
To switch user	--------	su - username
To check permission--------	ll
To change permission -------	chmod  700 foldername (note 700 is an e.g)
To create directory ------	mkdir foldername
To create file ------		touch filename
To generate key --------	ssh-keygen
To edit folder -------		vi foldername
other commands -----	pwd       show current location
			cd ~      home directory
			cd ..     move up one directory
			ls        list files
			ls -la    list all including hidden

 Notes
keys used for authentication: private key and public key
Private key is the secret key, never to be shared, it stays on the computer, never stored on the server usually stored in .ssh folder
Public Key is the open key shared with the server, stores in the server file .ssh/authorised_keys

step to creating a new user
1.	Create new user
2.	Create SSH folder
3.	Put public key 
4.	Fix permissions 
5.	Test login

testing





 GIt and GITHUB (25/11/25)

Git --- tool on laptop to track changes in files (like version 	history).

GitHub ---- website where to store Git projects online and share/sync them.

 Accessing GitHub by cloning of Repo

steps to clone a repo

	Created repo on GitHub

	Copied the link (HTTPS )
	created  a directory to store the intended repo folder

	Ran ---git clone "link copied"----

	Git created TestingGit folder automatically


GIT commands 

To commit a file------	git commit -m "Add notes file" (-m is to include a msg)
To know GIT version ----	git --version
To clone a repo --- git clone https://github.com/username/repo-name.git

``


Challenges/ Observation


when checked the details of the git account running (git config --global --list), it was the old one, alizinatjuinor. 
how? i taught all that was done was on the new account. then i realised we access the github via git by cloning  the repo 
from GitHub


